Let's work with local printing and Windows 10.
To start, we'll come over to the Start menu,
I'll type printer,
and we see under system settings there is a Printers and scanners heading.
So let's maximize the view here.
We see some that just come along for the ride by default.
The Fax software printer, there's the Print to PDF,
and Microsoft still has a virtual printer for its XPS Document Writer.
To add a new printer or scanner,
you really shouldn't have to use this wizard because the truth of
the matter is as soon as you plug in the printer,
Windows should recognize it and load the appropriate driver.
Nonetheless, let me show you the process.
When you click Add, it's going to perform a port search.
Because I don't have a local printer available,
I have one of two choices, plug a printer in,
or print device I should say in, or go down this path,
The printer that I want isn't listed.
And this is interesting here because we can go out to a shared print
queue by name using Universal Naming Convention syntax.
So if the print server is named dc1, I would do \\dc1,
and let's say that that printer's advertised as
office1floor for the first floor office printer,
we can just be done with that.
If we're using Internet Printing Protocol,
then it's going to be a little different yet.
We would have an HTTP or an HTTPS path of the server,
printer, subdirectory, and then the printer name.
The Browse capability allows us to go out over the network; it
actually opens up File Explorer to the Network node.
Now this is going to depend upon how your network is set up.
If you've got strong firewalling for instance,
or if you have network discovery turned off,
then that's not going to be a very effective way to do it.
I find myself that using Universal Naming Conventions is the best way to go.
If we were going to host a shared printer here on this machine
and we wanted to advertise it over TCP/IP,
we would choose Add a printer using a TCP/IP address or hostname.
There's an option for Bluetooth, wireless, or network discoverable printer.
There's Add a local or network printer with manual settings,
I'll choose that, and in that case, you have to choose a Printer Port,
and that gets into some really old school hardware,
like the Printer Ports are called Line Printing Ports,
LPT.
The old-school Serial Port is here.
It's quite obvious, to me anyway,
that this Add printer wizard is really meant to be run
only in a troubleshooting context,
or potentially if you want to connect to a network printer.
But in my experience as a systems administrator,
I configure all network printing on the server side because I
certainly don't want to inconvenience my users and have them
clicking around and getting frustrated.
Do you see what I mean?
I'm actually going to minimize this on this virtual machine,
and then bring from another machine that same dialog box that
does have a connection to a local printer.
On this particular machine, notice that I have Adobe Acrobat installed.
So I have the Adobe PDF printer, I have a live,
an actual HP Officejet Pro connected physically via USB.
Some other software may include a software printer like TechSmith Snagit.
Their screen capture software also gives you a print-to-file capability.
Looks like Microsoft OneNote 2016 does the same thing.
But let me select this physical print device,
and notice that we can Open the queue, Manage,
or Remove the device.
It looks like there's a Windows Store app that's also available.
We could click that link to investigate that if we want to.
If we click Open queue,
then that brings up a dialog box that's been around for a long,
long, long time.
This queue dialog, I just can't tell you how many years this has been around.
So if you've used this, then you already know all about it.
The Printer menu where you can adjust whether it's your default printer or not.
You can go to Printing Preferences, and again,
this is going to determine whether you have a class driver or
whether you have just the device-specific driver,
but it's going to give you options over which tray you're using,
duplexing, collation staples,
all that up to the level at which your printer supports those features.
Just for grins, I brought up an instance of Microsoft Word.
I'm going to go back stage and go to Print here.
In the client experience for printing we can choose which printer want to use.
I'm going to choose my HP, and then if we go to Printer Properties again,
it brings us to the driver and the driver software for that device,
and if I click Print,
we're going to see it show up in the queue and I'm going to
immediately right-click and Pause it.
You might hear some noise in the background as I record.
That is that Officejet Pro springing into action.
I wanted to make sure to pause it as quickly as possible,
I still might not have stopped it in time actually,
but when documents get stuck here in the queue,
this is a good place to troubleshoot.
When you right-click, you can Resume or Restart or Cancel a print job.
You can Pause Printing for the entire queue or just an
individual document within the queue.
I'm going to actually Cancel All Documents here.
And it says, are you sure you want to cancel all documents?
I'm going to answer Yes.
And now it says Deleting - Paused - print job.
That's really all there is to the local printing experience.
It doesn't get more complicated than that really,
and you've probably been there, done that,
bought the t-shirt.
It's predominately about troubleshooting when things go wrong.
Sorry about that background noise.
That is that print device going crazy.
Just for grins to see what else the driver gives us,
if we click Manage here,
it takes us to a separate page where we can Print a test page,
Run a troubleshooting wizard, look at the Printer properties.
The Printer properties is actually pretty useful.
Let me click that and show you.
If we go over to Sharing, there's a button for Additional Drivers,
and it'll list what driver is currently installed.
And it looks like I have some updating to do on this machine.
It's a Type 3 - User Mode driver.
It's not type 4.
So actually after I stop recording,
I'm going to go ahead and visit the HP site and make sure
I'm downloading the latest and greatest.
Now it says that the app is actually installed.
I didn't know that.
I'm learning this right along with you.
I'll click Open printer app,
and this is the trusted Windows Store app that evidently
came down through an update process,
and so presumably I not only can manage all aspects of
this device from this dedicated app,
but I can also get to settings and more robust metadata.
So I guess that's another nod in the direction of the
importance of going for the device-specific drivers, in particular, the drivers that are published by the vendor itself.